Thank you, everyone, who's joined in today. I really appreciate your time and hope that
this can be a productive time for all of us as we spend some time talking about R and
Plumber together. As Robert mentioned, my name is James Blaire. I work as a solutions
engineer for RStudio, and we're joined on the line today by Barret Schloerke, who also
works here at RStudio and is the primary maintainer of the Plumber package and is here to help
with questions and provide some support that way as well. So we're grateful for his presence
as well as we get started today. Our topic today is Expanding R Horizons, Integrating
R with Plumber APIs. The idea here is I'm hopeful that this really is an opportunity
for if you've never been exposed to Plumber before, I hope you find something that's useful.
And if you've used Plumber in the past and have come to kind of see what's new with Plumber,
I also hope that there's something useful. So the ideal state here is that everyone walks
away with something that's beneficial for them and that they feel like they've learned.
Just to kind of give you an idea of what we're going to do today. First, I want to set the
stage with a problem that we're going to look at to kind of frame the conversation that
we have. And then we'll have a brief discussion about what an API is in case you're unfamiliar.
And then we'll talk about how you get started using APIs with R and the Plumber package.
And then we'll spend some time discussing some of the new features that have been recently
released in the latest CRAN version of Plumber. And then finally, we'll conclude by looking at
different ways that you can deploy these APIs so that they can be widely utilized,
either inside of your organization or by a broader audience. And then at the end,
I'll provide some links to additional resources. And like Robert mentioned, this is being recorded.
Today's October 28, 2020. So if you're watching this recording down the road,
things may have changed in the Plumber package. And I'll share some links here at the end
that can make sure that you stay up to date with the latest changes and things like that. But
resources will be provided if you if you want to learn more.
Today, we're going to work with a data set. This is the Palmer penguins data set.
If you're unfamiliar, this is a fairly kind of recent to the R space data set. You can find some
more information at Allison Horse GitHub repository that I have linked here in the slides. But
basically, the idea here is we have 344 different observations for three different penguin species,
Chinstrap, Gentoo, and the Sedeli. And these different and this is if you're familiar with
kind of the iris data set, the typical kind of classification data set that you often see.
This is a similar style data set, right? Fairly easy to understand down here on the on the bottom
right hand corner, you can see kind of a preview of what this data looks like. We've got the species,
the island they came from, we have some different measurements from each of these different
penguins, their bill length, bill depth, flipper length, body mass. And then we have the sex of
the penguin and then the year that the measurement took place. So what we want to do here is just
kind of frame this and this could be any data set, right? This isn't the example that we walked
through today is not specific to this data set by any stretch of the imagination. But I think
like most data science, most analytical problems or projects start with some data. And that felt
like a natural place to start today. Let's start with some data and go from there. So what we want
to do now is we, you know, we'll say we've been handed this data and we're going to go ahead and
we're going to do the data science or in some cases, you know, that means build a model. And
we're going to take this, these 344 observations. This is not a model building or necessarily,
you know, data science themed webinar. So this is not about how to build the best model possible.
This is just let's work with an example that's easy for us to understand. So we'll take the data,
you know, we might explore it, clean it up a little bit, and then we'll fit this model to it.
And the idea here is given some set of measurements. So given the bill length,
the buildup, the flipper length, and the body mass, we want to predict the species of that
particular penguin, right? And so that's what we've done in the example that we have pulled
up on screen. We fit this model using the tidy models framework, and then we're able to see some
output from that model. And now that we have this, we can generate new predictions, right? We can,
given a set of new data, maybe we get a new set of measurements from a penguin of unknown species,
and we want to predict what the species of that penguin is, we can pass those new values through
to the model and generate a predicted outcome in terms of what species we think that penguin is
likely to be. Now, this is all great, but the question now is kind of, well, now what, right?
We have a couple of options. Now that we've done our work, we've built this model,
we have a few options ahead of us. One is we can just kind of ad hoc score new penguin predictions
whenever we receive new data, right? So maybe once a month we get an email from researchers
that are off researching penguins, and they send us their new set of data, and we run that set of
data through the model in order to predict the species of these new measurements. That works,
right? But maybe we want something that's a little bit more real time. Maybe there's, maybe
measurements are happening at a pretty rapid rate, and we don't want our entire day job from here on
out to be predicting penguin species using the model that we built, right? But we also don't
want the model that we built to just kind of wither away and die. We spend a lot of time here.
This was something that we feel like contributes to the goals of our business or the goals of the
project that we're working on, and we want to make sure that it continues to contribute in
the best way possible. But the problem is we're kind of stuck because we either have to be the
ones that generate new values and new predictions because we're the ones that built the model,
and we know how to use R, or we have to find somebody else that knows R and can do that
themselves, right? So maybe we email them or we provide them with access to the model, and they're
able to generate their own predictions. But that's still kind of a high bar because that means that
that person needs to be able to open up an R session and load our model and load the data
and run the data through the model, which if you're an R user, that's probably not that big
of a deal. But if you're trying to teach one of the business users or one of the end users of your
model how to run this, and you've got to teach them about R, now all of a sudden this becomes
a much larger task. The other option is we could just pass this off to somebody else. We could say,
okay, we've done our job. Here's the model. Here's kind of how we set this up. Now let's let that
model grow up, quote unquote, and we'll give it to an engineering team, and they'll reconstruct this
model in a framework that they're using so that it can be used for real-time scoring or real-time
predicting of new data. And that's a totally valid option, but it's often a little bit tricky to get
that right, right? To be able to hand off the model in that way, it's time-consuming. It can be,
you know, it can be a difficult process to go through when in reality we already have everything
we need. What we really need is just a convenient way for other people to be able to use our model.
And that's really where APIs come in. So let's take a step aside from the model for a moment,
and let's just talk about this notion of what an API is. And in general, an API stands for
Application Programming Interface. Now that can mean a lot of different things, and in different
contexts the idea of an API can mean different things, which makes it a little bit difficult
to understand. And so for the purpose of our conversation today, we're going to narrow in
on this definition that an API is a web API communicating over HTTP. And basically what
that is, is that provides us with a standardized way for different computers to communicate with
one another. And I'm not going to dive into the nitty-gritty details of what makes up an API
request and what a response looks like. There's lots of different features involved here that
you can look into, and that will provide some resources that provide some detail there.
But the main idea is when we talk about web APIs over HTTP, which is what we're going to talk
about today, this is just a standardized set way for different computers to communicate. Just like
I'm communicating now through my voice, and you're able to understand, computers have their own way
of communicating. HTTP web APIs is one of those mechanisms for communication. The idea is there's
a client that sends a request, that request meets the standard of what the server is expecting,
and then a server receives that request and then generates some sort of a response.
And that response could be something as simple as, I received the request, that's all I need,
that's all I need to do. To something that's much more complex, like firing off some sort of process
or updating a database or generating predictions against the model, or any number of different
things can happen in response to a request that comes in. But the server is responsible for taking
the request and doing something with it and then providing a response. And even if you've never
really interacted directly, knowingly with APIs in the past, it's interesting to note that
anytime you use a web browser, so if you use Google Chrome or Safari or Brave or Firefox or anything
like that, and you visit a website, there's a request that your web browser makes to a server
that says, hey, I'd like to view this web page that's at this address, and the server responds
with typically a bunch of HTML that your browser then renders for you to view. So anytime you view
a website, you're really interacting with APIs, even if you don't acknowledge that fact, right?
Your computer is a client and it's sending a request, and there's a server somewhere that's
responding to that request with some HTML that you view as the web page. Now, this is, again,
not meant to be a comprehensive overview of what APIs are or how APIs work, but this hopefully sets
the stage and gives you a little bit of background. And the next general question I think that makes
sense to ask here is, okay, well, that's great, but as an R user, as a statistician, as an actuary,
as a data scientist, as an analyst, why do I care, right? Why is this something that's
important to me? And I think there's kind of two reasons here that this becomes significant,
and it goes back to our initial conundrum where we built this model and we want to give people
access to it, but we don't want to train the whole company on how to use R, right? And the fact is
APIs allow the work that you do to be used by a wide range of tools and technologies,
and that's no longer limited to just the R language, okay? So, I can now essentially say,
okay, I've got this model that we're going to work with, and we'll walk through an example of this
in just a moment, but I have this model here, and I've got another team in my organization that's
using Python, or they're using C Sharp, or they're using JavaScript, or they're using C++,
or they're using any number of tools, and they want to use my model. Well, APIs allow me to do
that in a very, very straightforward and easy way so that I no longer need to hand off my model to
be rebuilt by another team in another language, but instead, they can just communicate directly
with the work that I've done via this web API. And this, again, the idea here is this dramatically
reduces the handoff between the work that you do in R and other tools that are being built
within your organization by teams using other languages or other technology frameworks.
So, with that kind of in mind, let's talk briefly about how Plumber works and how
Plumber creates this bridge between our users and developers and other tools and technologies.
Here's an example of a Plumber API over here on the left-hand side of the screen,
and I want us to, I'm going to walk through some of the core components here, but before I do that,
if you just take a step back and ignore the comments, right, so if you just ignore the
commented lines of code or the commented lines in this R code, it should look pretty straightforward
if you've written R code before. We've got a couple of functions that we define,
and we load the Plumber package at the top of this script. And if I look at these functions,
there's nothing that's terribly, you know, interesting or different about them. If I look
at the first function over here, it takes a single parameter message, and then it returns a list
just that verifies that it received the message, essentially, right? It returns a list that says,
okay, the message is, and then it echoes back that message. My second function here doesn't
take any arguments, and instead it just returns a histogram of some random values that I drew
from the normal distribution. So, it's pretty easy to reason about what these two functions
will do, right? Function one is going to echo back whatever I give it. Function two is going
to give me a random histogram of some values. Now, the real, I think the real magic and the
real power of the Plumber package is how it allows me to go from these simple R functions
to a responsive web API in just a couple of comments. And that's where these comments come
into play. So, if you focus on what I have highlighted here in this box, you'll notice that
these comments look a little bit different than standard R comments. I've got the pound similar,
the hashtag symbol, that's what is typically used to comment things in R, but then I follow that
with an asterisk. And that indicates the Plumber, hey, this is a special comment that provides
instructions for what Plumber needs to do. And so, I can see, for example, if I take this first
comment, I give it this API title tag. And I know that because it starts with the at symbol and an
API title. And then I give the API some sort of a name, Plumber example API in this case.
And then the next comment block, these three comments following describe how Plumber should
use the function that comes afterwards. So, first comment here tells me, gives a description of what
this function is going to do. It's going to echo back the input. My second comment here describes
the parameters of that function. So, in this case, I have a single message parameter, that parameter
is the message that I'm going to echo. And then the final line here is perhaps the most important,
because it defines both what types of requests this will respond to, as well as what path this
particular function is listening on. And so, essentially, what this says is, okay, if I run
this as an API, and I make some sort of a request to the echo path, you see this slash echo here,
then what I'm going to get back is I'm going to get back the response of this function. And
whatever this function does, that will be returned to whatever client makes a request at this echo
endpoint. And to be even more specific, that client will make a get request, which we've denoted with
this get tag here. So, the idea is I write standard R code as functions. I use these special comments
to identify how Plumber should handle those functions. And then I run the API, or I plum it,
right. And you can see here in this little screenshot, I've got this run API button.
And in practice, what this looks like is this. I click run API. I'll get this nice little window
that pops open over here that shows me the API running. And then I can try this out. I can say,
here's my message is hello world. I'm going to go ahead and try that out. And if we scroll down,
we can see that the output of that message is the output or the output of that of that execution is
the output of the function that I wrote in R. So again, if I look at this, try this out,
write my message, hello world. And then here at the bottom, we'll see some JSON that comes back
that contains the output of my function message, the messages, hello world. And it really is that
simple, right? Now what I've done is I've taken my functions in R and I've made them so that
they're easily accessible from other tools and other frameworks. So, let's actually take a look
at this and let's consider our original kind of situation here. We've got this model that we built
using this Penguin data set. And what we want to do now is we want to see, okay, is there a way for
us to expose this model so that others can interact with it? Is there a way for us to
essentially say, okay, what if a client makes a request with new data? Could we just respond
with the predicted outcomes? Could we just respond with the predicted species given that request and
do that automatically so that if somebody in another department has a Python script that
wants to use our model, they can just send a request with new data and we can send them back
the predicted outcome. That's what we want to accomplish here. So, let's actually, I'm going to
flip over here to RStudio now and let's go ahead and let's build this out. Okay. So,
what we want to do is we want to load the plumber package. And then before I do anything else,
let's just kind of make sure that we've got the pieces in place that we want to have in place.
So, what I'm going to do first here is I'm going to create, I'm going to zoom in a little bit,
I'm going to create just a single endpoint that all it does is just verifies that things are
working. It's not going to do anything other than just return some information that says, hey,
the lights are on, things seem to be working. So, we'll call this, we'll write the function here,
if I could type, and we'll say we want to return a list and we want to say, okay, the status is that
all is good. And then we'll return the time just so we can verify that this is working the way that
it should. Okay. And if I run this function, we could call this function status or something like
that. And if I run this function in R, we can see what I get back. I get back this list and it tells
me the status is all good. And it gives me this timestamp of when that function executed.
And now what I want to do is I want to turn this into an API endpoint. So, we'll give it a little
description here. We'll say, we'll call this health check. We'll just call this health check,
right? Is the API running? Okay. So, that's our description. And then this will respond to
get requests at the health check panel, right? So, I've taken, I've written my function and now
all I'm doing is I'm adding these special comments that we saw before that tell Plumber what to do
with this function, right? What do I want to do? Well, I want to call it health check. This is the
title and description I'm going to give it. And then here's the important piece that says, okay,
whenever a get request comes in, and I'm not going to get into what different request types are and
things like that, that's an exercise for another time. But essentially, if a request comes into
this location, then return the results of this function, execute this function and return the
results. And if we save this, we can click run API here. And we'll see over here on the right
hand side, we've got this little interface that shows up that allows us to see, okay, we've got
this health check. Let me expand this out a little bit so we can see. All right. So, here I've got
this get health check. It tells me the description of the endpoint, which is what we provided right
here is the API running health check is the API running. And we can try this out. Let's come in
and try this out. There's no parameters. I don't need to provide any parameters here. So, I can just
execute this. And here I see my response body. And I can see directly. In fact, let's see if we can
make this a little easier to compare. If I scroll up up here. Here we go. Here's the result of my
function in R, right? We ran the function in R. And that's what we see. And here is the result when
I make a request, an API request to this endpoint. And hopefully you can see the connection between
the two, right? I hear up top, I've got an R list that was created that tells me the status and the
time. And here down below, I have that same list, except now it's just in JSON format, which is
the kind of the industry standard for how these APIs communicate. Now, you can adjust how this
what type of response this an API generates. And we'll look at that here in a little bit.
But by default, plumber will take the output of your function and convert it to JSON. And that
JSON data will be returned to the client. So, here's what we here's what we saw returned to
the client. And basically, what this says is, okay, we have this working, right? plumbers working,
we're able to see that the API is running, we can try this out again, if we wanted to, right,
we could execute this again. And we see the same result. But the timestamp is now updated to
reflect the current time, which in my local time is 1123 am. All right, we're gonna stop the API
and now we're going to keep going. So this this makes sure that okay, we've got all the pieces in
place, we know what we're doing. Now let's figure out, okay, what do we really want to do? What's
our goal here? Well, first of all, I need the model. So I've already saved the model, we'll
just read the model in, we'll say model is read model. Okay, so I've got this model op file that
I've already saved, we can read this in here. Alright, so we've got our model. And now what
I want to be able to do is I want to say, okay, what if I if I predict my model, and I say new
data is and I've got some JSON data lying around, so we'll say, read JSON penguins.
Okay, and I'll say type equals crop. Okay. So let's see. Oh, we need to do.
There we go. Alright. So now if I look at this, and I'll walk through what we did here. But if I
look, what I really want is I want to say, okay, given my model that I already trained,
I want to be able to give it some new data and return the predicted outcomes. So in this case,
what I'm returning is I'm returning a probability value for each of the three different species,
right. So in this case, penguin one has a strong, we're almost entirely confident in this gen two,
prediction two, or observation two, we're very strongly predicting that it's Delhi, so on and so
forth, I can see the breakdown across each potential outcome or each potential species
here in my output. So this works. This is I mean, this is how I would generate new predictions in R.
But what I really want is I really want this functionality to take place in an API, I want
somebody to be able to just pass me some data. And then I can pass them back the predicted outcomes,
like like what I'm doing here in R. So this is this is our goal right here. Our goal is to do
this is to have this kind of behavior in an API endpoint. So we've got our model in place,
we'll need to let's bring in we've got a couple of other packages that we'll need to make sure
that they're available in our environment here just for the model. So we need to bring in
the parse net package for the predict function to work the right the way that we want it to.
And this is all because of how we train the model. And then we want to bring in
the ranger package because we trained this model using the ranger package. So this is again,
just to remind ourselves, this is a random forest model that we built, we saved it out.
And now we're going to use it in this API that we're building. Okay, I've got these pieces in
place. So now, what I want is I want to say, okay, I've got a function. And and what I want to be
able to do is I want to say, okay, I want to predict I've already got my model, because I've
loaded that in my environment. So I've got I've got my model. And then I've got new data.
And this is the part, okay, now I got to figure this out, because where is this data going to
come from? Right? I don't have, like, like, when I run this as an API, I want this data to come
from the user, right? This is the this is this is data that comes from the client request. Okay.
So, okay, let's think about how that works. The way that this works in plumber is, I'm going to
have, I'm going to write my function so that it takes a couple of arguments, request req and
response rs. And what this does, if I write my function this way, it allows me to have access
to the full request that's being made from within my function, plumber will automatically pass that
that request object into my function, and then I have access to it. And one of the cool things
with plumber with with the latest release of plumber is that you can automatically parse
incoming data and make it available in the request itself. So for example, if I have a user that
makes a request with some JSON data, and says, Okay, here's here's some, here's some information
about some new penguins we found. And I want to know what their what their species is. So they
make this request, plumber will automatically take that JSON data, convert it to a data frame,
and make it available for me to use within the body of this function that I'm writing right now.
So all we need to know is we need to know, okay, well, what, what, like, where, where does that
get stored, and it gets stored as the request as part of the request, and it gets stored as the
body object attached to this incoming request. And in fact, we'll take a look at that in just a
moment. But this is this is essentially what I want to be able to do, I want to say, okay,
let's do this. And let's say, pipe is probability. Like we saw before, right, we're just we're just
taking this, this function, that was our goal. And we're, we're now putting it inside this
function that we're going to use within our API. So we're going to say this is going to be predict
species for new penguins. Okay. And then this is, let's say we want to
respond to post requests at the predict endpoint. Okay, excellent. Let's, let's, let's go ahead and
run this. I'm going to go, I'm going to go ahead and comment this out, just because this isn't
a necessary piece of what we're doing. This is just so that we know what we're trying to
accomplish here. We're going to run this API. And let's pop this open over here. Okay. So we
see our health check, let's just verify that that's doing what we think it should be.
And it looks like it is, which is great. That means everything's working on the plumber side,
as far as we know. And then let's take a look at our predict endpoint here. Okay,
we've got this predict endpoint, we'll try it out. Okay, execute. Okay, we get some sort of error
here. Okay. And if we look at this, this is just an R error that's come back to us in JSON format,
right, which is again, a nice kind of feature of a plumber is that if my R code throws an error,
I can capture that error. And I can gracefully return something to the user. Or if I don't
capture it or do anything like that, then plumber will automatically take that error message,
convert it into JSON and return it back to the user. So they get some idea of what's going on.
And what's really happening here is, like, I didn't give this any data. So this is saying,
look, I didn't find, you know, one or more independent variables was not found.
Like, I didn't find any data. And that actually makes sense, because I didn't, I didn't give it
any data in here, right? Like, I didn't, there wasn't any part of this where I like provided it
with some sample data. And so now I've got to figure out, okay, well, how do I, how can I
provide some sample data here? Right. And one of the one of the features that's new to plumber
is the ability to modify the user interface that appears. So we saw this user interface that showed
up over here. In fact, let me just run this one more time so we can see it. Right. So I've got
this user interface that appears over here. This is really, really nice, because it means that as
an R user, when I'm building my API, and I run it, I get a nice, really clean way to interact
with the API directly from within our studio, right, right here in our studio, I can check to
see that my API is working. And here we go, right? Things are working, I can check this endpoint.
But as we just saw, if I try to do something like check this endpoint, all of a sudden,
I'm in a little bit of a bind, because there's nothing here that allows me to pass in data.
So what I really would like is I'd like somebody to say, okay, like, how can I like, can I just
plop some JSON in here, right? Like, instead of, instead of not being able to do anything,
what if I could just drop some JSON into here, and and run it that way. And with the newest
release of plumber, that is entirely possible. So that entire user interface that we're just
looking at, is built around something called the open API specification. Now, the entire
open API specification is a massive standardization standardized format for defining API behavior,
and endpoints and things like that, I am not going to spend a lot of time going into the entirety
of what open API is, and all that entails. And you're certainly welcome to look more into that
on your own. But what it means for us as our users, and as plumber users, is that if we want
to enhance the capability of our of our user interface here, we can do so by doing one of
two things, we can either modify it directly in our with by modifying a list, a massive list,
or we can provide our own specification file and use that from within our and so that's,
that's what we're going to do here. And I'll show you what this looks like. So I'm going to create
another little section here. And we're going to call this app plumber. This is another new feature
of the package. And basically what this special tag does is it allows me to take my existing
plumber object and modify it however I want. Okay, so I'm no longer defining an endpoint. But
rather, what I'm doing is I'm saying, okay, after I've done all this stuff, so after I've added
health check, after I've added predict, I want to further modify this object that's being created.
And so I'm going to say this is a function, and we'll call it PR for my plumber router.
And then in here, I can modify what what I want to do to this PR object. And this gives me another
chance to unveil one more really great feature of the newest release of plumber. And that is,
I can now do something like this PR pipe, we are set API spec. And I want to say, okay, let's I've
got this yaml file that I'm going to read. And I'll show you what this file looks like in just
a moment here. Okay, so let's before we look at this yaml file, let's look at what we're doing
here. I'm saying, okay, plumber, take this information and start building me an API router.
But now that you've built these pieces, so you've got this endpoint, you've got this endpoint,
I want to do something else to it, I want to take that router, and I want to add this API
specification file, right. And so what I can do here is I can either provide a named list,
which this will do. Or I can modify the existing specification that plumber is already building
for me, either one works, I kind of like this approach, because it allows me to lay out the
whole outline of what I want. And that can be helpful. But either one works. So if we look at
this open API file here, this is a yaml file that just contains information about the API.
And notice, I define like the summary for my health check, I define the summary for predict.
And if I run this, now we come back over here to my plumber file, and we run this,
you'll notice that my descriptions have now changed, right? My health check says determine
if the API is running and listening as expected. And notice that here, my description says health
check is the API running? Well, why are those two things different? They're different,
because I overwrite in this yaml file what that description should be. Notice in here,
I say, determine if the API is running and listening as expected. And that is what we
see listed in my interface. Okay, so I have effectively overwritten some of what I already
did by providing this new definition file. But in addition to overwriting some of that
information, I've also described that I want to be able to pass in JSON data to this predict
endpoint. And so if I come over here and open this up, it tells me here, look, the request body
should be JSON. And here's an example of what that JSON data should look like. And if I try this
out, I can come in here and I can edit this, I could say, well, what if we said 5110? Or what
if we said 5440 or 5540? Whatever the case is, right? I can come in and I can pass my own data
into this endpoint now and try it out. Right, we can execute this. And here we see that we have
once again, an internal error. And this is because if we come back over to our
API file for just a moment, we're passing in only a single value.
And it's being parsed as a vector instead of a data frame. So if we just change this one piece,
and say we want this to be a data frame. Now let's run the API one more time.
Try this out. Here's our data that we're passing in. Let's execute on that data.
And here we see our response is a JSON object that contains the predicted probability for each
associate species. So in this case, this particular penguin is almost a toss up,
right? We're not super sure which one it is. It may be a chinstrap, but it's a fairly even split
across all three potential outcomes here. And what's great about this is now we have exactly
what we were describing originally, right? If I come back up here for just a moment and look at
what my goal was, right? I want to enable an external user to give me some data. And then
I want to be able to return to them the associated likelihood that that particular set of data
matches up with each of the three species that are potential outcomes. And that's exactly what
I've done here. Now to recap, right, just to revisit this idea one more time, we have specified
our own specification file, this YAML file that identifies all the details of how this user
interface should be laid out. And that's what enables me to have the ability to input the JSON
data needed to generate a response from this endpoint. So all from within RStudio itself,
I'm able to build my API, and I'm able to come over here and verify that that API is working
the way that it needs to. Okay, that's been a little bit to swallow. I know that, you know,
maybe we've gotten into some detail that we didn't necessarily need to or want to get into. But I
think it's useful to understand how some of these pieces work. Is it necessary to change the API
specification file? No. Is it something that you have to do? No, right? You can do this, you can
operate just fine without it. Now, granted, that might mean that you need to find some other way
to make a request to your API to verify that your predict endpoint is working the way that you
expect. But there are lots of tools that work that will enable you to interact with APIs and a
really nice kind of clean interface. Postman is one that I use regularly. And there are several
others that exist as well that allow you to generate requests and see responses and things
like that. So do you need to make these modifications? No. But if you want to, you
certainly can. Let's take a look at one more thing here that I think is, again, maybe a little bit
extra, but I think it's useful to know the default interface. I'm going to run this API one more time.
The default interface here is Swagger. And I see that up here in the top left of the corner. This
is the Swagger interface. Swagger has been around for quite a while. Open API, the specification
kind of grew out of some of the efforts that went into Swagger and everything like that. But
essentially, now what we have is Swagger is will interpret my specification and give me this
interface. There are other alternatives to Swagger that exist today that do the same thing,
that create an interface for me to use. And now within Plumber, given the latest release,
it's entirely possible to use one of those other systems instead of using Swagger itself. So,
for example, if I wanted to use it, there's a library or a viewer called Rapidoc. So if I
wanted to use Rapidoc, I could come in here. There's an R package. It's not released on CRAN.
It's only on GitHub at this point. There's an R package called Rapidoc that I can install here
or that I could load here. And then further down, I could say, let's do PR set docs.
And we'll say docs is Rapidoc. We'll save these changes. And now if I come back and run my API
again, you'll see that my interface looks different. I have the same functionality,
right? I can open up this one. I can try this out. I can see the response. I can open up this one.
Come in here. I can see the example data. I can try this out. We see the response, right? So again,
my functionality remains the same, but maybe I have a preference over which particular UI I use
when I'm experimenting with and working with my APIs. And you have the flexibility now in Plumber
to be able to define those. One more thing that I want to look at here is while we've got this open,
we have this built in example here that gives us the measurements for a single penguin.
But I've also got this Java or excuse me, this this JSON data here that contains measurements
for several penguins. And if we copy this in here and try this out, we'll see that our response now
includes predicted output for all the penguins that I provided input for. Right. So I now have
this long JSON object that contains all the information for the penguins that I provided.
OK, let's look at one more thing here. Let's come back into my plumber file and let's say, OK,
instead of JSON, though, let's say I just I really want I really want CSV data to come out of this.
Right. So we could say at serializer CSV. This tells plumber, look, when you return the output
of this function, don't return it as as JSON, return it as a CSV file. And if I run this again
or return this as CSV data, and if I run this again and try this, let's bring in all of our
observations again. You can see now instead of this JSON object, I have comma separated values
for my response. Right. So I can adjust what specifically is returned to the client from
within here. OK, we're going to take a step back from this for a moment, we'll revisit our API
here in just a minute. Let's go ahead and stop this. We'll save these changes here and let's
come back to our to our slides. OK, so just to recap and kind of summarize what we looked at here,
several new features have landed in the plumber package with the latest release,
the tidy interface. So the ability to build your APIs by piping from one command to the next
is new. We barely touched on that, but that's something that you can explore more if you're
interested. The ability to automatically parse and parse the incoming request body so that it's
available for downstream execution is new, which we saw that when we said, OK, the request body
contains the parsed values that we're getting from the client. There's support for new serializers.
And the way that you define serializers is greatly simplified. The open API specification we looked
at, you can adjust that in a couple of different ways by either providing your own file or by
modifying the existing list that are is working with. You can customize the UI. So instead of
using swagger, which is the default, you can use rapid. You can use redock. There's a handful of
different custom UIs you can use. And last but not least, the plumber hex logo has gotten a facelift.
This was on the title slide, so you probably already come across it. But there's the new
plumber logo that that accompanies this update that's happening. OK, so now we've got this API.
It's running. It's doing what we want. We've mission accomplished. Right. We're able to
take in some data. We're able to generate predictions. We're able to return that data
back to the client. All is good, except for one thing. We are still the bottleneck. Right. Like
this is like I'm just working off my laptop right now. And so when I'm running this API,
it's just running locally here on my own machine. And that works for development purposes and testing
purposes. But what happens when I now want to say, look, Sarah and engineering is ready to make a
request to this API? Well, I don't want my laptop to always to be the one thing that's servicing
these requests. I need some way to deploy this so that it's in an environment where it's always
listening and available to clients that are trying to make that request. Again, whether those clients
or other parts of my organization, or maybe I've built an API that's just generally publicly
available and is being used by who knows who. There are a couple of options that exist for
deploying plumber APIs. RStudio Connect is a professional product that's developed and built
by RStudio that allows for easy deployment of plumber APIs. We'll look at an example of that
here in just a moment. You can deploy, you can wrap up these APIs inside of a Docker container
and then deploy them into an environment that's suitable for that type of deployment. And then
there's some nice kind of helper functions that used to exist in the plumber package and have now
been offloaded to a new package called Plumber Deploy that allow you to easily deploy to Digital
Ocean. And that package may evolve to include other deployment endpoints as well. So we've got
a host of different options. I want to spend a couple of minutes just to talk about RStudio
Connect as one potential way of deploying these plumber APIs. RStudio Connect is like I mentioned,
it's a professional product that we create and develop here at RStudio. It allows for easy push
button deployment of things created in R and Python. It handles dependency management. So all
of your packages and dependencies come along for the ride. It allows you to adjust how your API
scales, how it responds to concurrent requests, how new processes are generated, things of that nature.
It integrates with Git and GitHub so that you can automatically deploy from repositories. You can
specify who has permission and authentication to access things like APIs and dashboards and
things like that. And then, like I said, in addition to Plumber, you can also publish R Markdown
documents and reports, Shiny applications, Jupyter notebooks, Flask, Dash, Streamlet, Python applications,
and other additional pieces of content. And if you'd like to learn more,
you can visit our website rstudio.com slash product slash connect, which details what RStudio Connect
is and provides a little bit of additional context. But what I'd like to do now is I'd like to take a
look at RStudio Connect. So if I come here, this is RStudio Connect. Let's come in to kind of the
landing page here. So here's what I see when I come into RStudio Connect, something like this.
And let's go through the process of publishing this API that we built. Now, I've set up this
API that we built in RStudio to be publishable via Git. So if I come in here and say, OK, let's
import this from a Git repository. Let's pull in the repository name. So that is, let's see.
OK, so here's the repository for that. I had to find it really quick.
So GitHub.com, I've got this repository that I keep talks and things that I do in. And then this
is the Plumber Webinar 2020 repository. Click Next here. This will look to see what branches
are available. I've only got a single branch available there right now. Click Next. And then
this will look for deployable subdirectories. In this case, we only have one. It's looking
for this manifest file that I previously created. And then we'll call this Plumber.
OK, deploy content. And now this is deploying our content.
There we go. Let's open this up and see what it looks like.
OK, so here we have our API running. I can open this up and say, OK, let's,
you know, anybody can come in here and view this if they want to. Here's my health check. Let's
verify that this is working. Looks like it is. Gives me back the information that I expect.
Let's check out our our other endpoint or predict endpoint. It looks like it's doing what we wanted
to do. There we go. We see our CSV output here and all is well and good. Right. I've got everything.
Everything is working the way that I expect it to. And just to kind of illustrate this,
right, if I so one one way to to quickly and easily demonstrate how an external either tool
or framework or language can make a request to this API. If I open this API up here.
There we go. Let's take a look at this. So now I've opened this up so that it's just
open kind of in its own isolated environment. And if I instead of going to docs, go to
the health check. And this might be a little small to see. And I apologize,
but I'm just visiting the URL and then adding health check to the end of it.
And basically what this means is my browser is now going to make a request to the health check
endpoint. And if we do this, my browser shows me the JSON that's coming back from that health
check endpoint. So without any sort of like fancy bells and whistles, I've just now made a request
to this API from my web browser. And I'm now seeing the results of that request rendered here
and in front of us. Okay, so last thing that I want to highlight here before we wrap things up,
all is well and good, right? My API is running, I can give other developers or other teams within
my organization, I can give them the information they need to make requests to this API,
they can make those requests, my API will respond back to them. And all is good. But now let's say,
okay, I publish this, it's great. And then I get an email in a couple of days, it says, look,
we started using and interacting with your API, we noticed that it's giving us back
comma separated values, right? And we'd really prefer to get JSON, like we can parse the CSV
data, but our platforms built around JSON, could you provide us with JSON as a response instead of
these comma separated values. And we've already seen how to do that, right? If we come back into
our studio here, and take a look, right, if we come, if we take this serializer and say, instead
of CSV, let's just do JSON. And JSON is the default, right? So if I deleted this whole thing,
it would still be JSON. But we could we could save this change. Okay, we're gonna, we're gonna return
JSON data here. Let's go ahead and save that. And then let's come in to if I can pull it open,
there we go. Let's come into Git and make and commit this change, we'll say, okay, we're gonna,
we're gonna update to JSON serialization. Okay, commit that. We'll go ahead and push this change
to GitHub. And now let's go ahead and grab our big bunch of penguins. And if we come back over here,
our studio connect will check every 15 minutes or so by default to see what changes have been
made to the repository. But I'm also just going to kind of manually kick it off and say, okay,
let's just check for any updates in the repository. Hey, some changes were found,
we're going to redeploy this. Okay, we're ready to go. And now if I come in
and try this endpoint out, we'll change our example to include all this, we can see that
my response is now JSON instead of CSV. And I didn't have to do anything. All I did was make a
change and commit that change to my GitHub repository, like I normally do in my regular
workflow. And our studio connect will automatically pick up on that change, redeploy the content and
make it available so that I can make the change, push it to GitHub and email that developer back
and say it should be fixed. Now, you should now be able to receive JSON. All right. So
in conclusion, if you're interested in learning more about Plumber and the tools that we've talked
about today, here's a whole list of resources you can go to visit. The first list, the first
resource listed here is the Plumber website, and then a bunch of different GitHub repositories. So
the Plumber GitHub repository, if you run into like issues or questions with the package,
you can go there to see if that issue has already been submitted, or you can submit your own issue.
The second repository listed here is a collection of just example APIs to kind of build from,
if you are looking for some examples to get started with. Plumber deploy, I briefly mentioned,
currently has the DigitalOcean functions for deploying to DigitalOcean. This Rapidoc
repository is something we used today so that we could change the user interface that we saw with
Plumber. The material that we looked at today, so the example files and everything like that,
the slides will be made available at the webinars GitHub repository that's listed here.
So look for that to be published there shortly. And then the community, the RStudio community site
has a Plumber group or a Plumber tag that you can follow. If you're interested in questions being
asked about Plumber, or if you have questions on your own that you'd like to ask to the community,
you can do so there. And then finally, RStudio has our global conference coming up in January.
Barrett, who's again joined us today, is going to be presenting some additional new functionality
with Plumber and asynchronous execution at that. And that's an entirely virtual conference that
you can attend. And I would encourage you to attend as well, especially if you're interested
in asynchronous Plumber execution, as that is what Barrett is going to be speaking about there.
And then finally, just thank you again for your time, for joining us today. I've appreciated this
opportunity to present on Plumber and all the new features that we've added to the package.
We're really excited about the work that's being done. If you have questions, if you have,
you know, things you want to discuss, feel free to reach out. Reach out on RStudio community.
I monitor that site quite frequently and respond to questions or comments that are posted there.
And again, just from all of us here at RStudio, thank you very much for joining us today. I think
we've got a couple of minutes here for questions. And so I'm going to kind of pause and pull open
the questions here to see if there's anything that remains to be answered. There's a question
that came in that says, are there any suggested tools or packages to integrate security to secure
access to APIs? Really good question. There's not anything on like the R package standpoint
that I've really tested. I know that a while ago, and I'm trying to remember the name,
I came across a group that was building an R package that the goal was to provide security,
some security functionality for Plumber APIs. I haven't revisited that in quite a while. And in
fact, like I said, I don't quite remember what the name of that repository or package was going
to be. So I don't know where things ended up there. I don't know how far that made it.
Because of Plumber's flexibility, you can handle like security and authentication and things like
that yourself. It becomes, I don't want to say tricky, but it just, you have to think carefully
about it to make sure that you don't leave yourself open to like security vulnerabilities.
But you could certainly, for example, have a filter in place that says, look,
if a request is made without a specific header or without a specific token,
then that doesn't get passed through. That request gets rejected and 404 is out or something like
that. You can certainly do that on your own within Plumber, but there's no, like I said,
to my knowledge, there's no kind of out of the box package or tool that does that for you.
That being said, RStudio Connect does have API key-based authentication. So if I, for example,
take my, let me just come back here for just a minute. If I take my little API here and instead
said, look, you have to log in to view this, then that would require users to submit a request with
an API key as one of their headers. And RStudio Connect will verify that key and verify that the
key belongs to a user that is allowed permission to this API and then pass that through. But again,
that's something that's enforced on the RStudio Connect level and not being enforced at the
Plumber level. Plumber is still just responding as usual. RStudio Connect is acting as the gatekeeper
in front of it to filter out requests that are invalid. It's a great question. Can you completely
customize the look of the API that makes it look prettier for users? Are you stuck with the template
you showed? So those templates, so we looked at Swagger, we looked at Rapidoc. Those are based
off of the open API specification. Basically what those do, those are frameworks that take
that open API specification, which was basically that big YAML file we looked at,
and then generate a UI layer on top of it. And then the nice thing about Plumber is it connects
that UI layer to the underlying R process that's running the API. So I've got this nice direct
link between, OK, I've got this API running and now I can interact with it like we see here. I've
got this nice sort of UI layer. I don't have a lot of experience with each of those individual
pieces. So for example, we're using Rapidoc here, right? I don't know how customizable the look and
feel of this particular framework is. I do know that there are a handful of frameworks that exist
today and there's kind of more being created, almost it feels like all the time. And so it's
possible that some may provide additional flexibility. I don't entirely know the answer
to that particular question. Can Plumber dictate rate limits? Another excellent question. Not out
of the box. There's nothing specific in Plumber where you can specify a rate limit tag or setting
or anything like that. You could build in rate limiting yourself. It would require some additional
legwork because you'd have to have some way of identifying how are you rate limiting? Are you
rate limiting to a specific user? And then you'd have some sort of cache where you keep track of
what their rate limit or what their current consumption is, and then check that consumption
against the limit that they've been given and provide messaging around that limit. You can
build all that in a Plumber. I'm not saying that it's not possible. I'm just saying there's not
anything built in that allows you to rate limit, but you could certainly build that functionality
into your APIs by using tools that Plumber provides. Okay. Yes. Okay. So once deployed,
how do you submit the new data to the model API? It seems unwieldy to just like pass in a giant
browser URL. Totally correct, right? In most cases, these APIs aren't going to be interacted
with via a web browser, but rather somebody else. So maybe you've got a front end developer
that's writing JavaScript, or you've got a mobile app developer developing in Swift or whatever the
case is. All of these frameworks have their own libraries, packages, tools for building and
sending API requests, and those developers would often do that. So for example, as an R user,
the HTTR package is what you would use to build a request. So if you were an R user submitting a
request to me, I could submit a request to this API we just built, right? I could use the HTTR
package to build that request, including the new data that's going to be passed to the predict
endpoint and send that request over. And then the response will come back and I could work with it
from there. So in most cases, the nice thing is when you start talking about APIs, most developers
will understand kind of how to work with that. And they'll have their own framework that they
use for sending requests. And the nice thing is those requests will all be formatted the same way
because HTTP is a standard format. So your API, it doesn't matter if the request is coming from
an R script using HTTR, if it's coming from Python using the request module, it doesn't matter if
it's coming from Golang, it doesn't matter. The request comes in, the API executes and returns
the response. And lots of frameworks have their own way of making those requests.
Okay. Last question I'll answer here in the last minute that we've got, what is the advantage of
using an R API versus Shiny apps? Really good question. Shiny applications are really best
suited for like human interaction, right? So if I've got a Shiny application, I'm going to come
in here and I'm going to interact with it as an individual, right? As a API, it's not necessarily
expected that users are going to come in here and interact with the API this way. They might do it
a little bit, right? Just to kind of check some things, but in most cases, an API is going to be
interacted with programmatically. So I might build a plumber API so that another tool that my company
developed can use my model or can use the business logic that I've implemented in my API. I might
use a Shiny app so that another user can view my model, if that makes sense, right? So the
distinction here is who's the end user. In one case for Shiny, it's another human that's
interacting with my application. For APIs, it's most likely another tool
that's interacting with my application or with my API.